CHAPTER IV
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
28. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the District Commission, in each district of
the State:
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one
District Commission in a district.
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of—
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than two and not more than such number of members as may be
prescribed, in consultation with the Central Government.
Designation
of any
statutory
authority or
body to
function as
Central
Authority.
Appeal.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Accounts and
audit.
Furnishing of
annual
reports, etc.
Establishment
of District
Consumer
Disputes
Redressal
Commission.
29. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the
qualifications, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation
and removal of the President and members of the District Commission.
30. The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President, and members of the
District Commission.
31. Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of the District
Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such as
President or, as the case may be, as member till the completion of his term for which he has
been appointed.
32. If, at any time, there is a vacancy in the office of the President or member of a
District  Commission, the State Government may, by notification, direct—
(a) any other District Commission specified in that notification to exercise the
jurisdiction in respect of that district also; or
(b) the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in that
notification to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the President or
member of that District Commission also.
33. (1) The State Government shall provide the District Commission with such officers
and other employees as may be required to assist the District Commission in the discharge
of its functions.
(2) The officers and other employees of the District Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the President of the District Commission.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the District Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
34. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District Commission shall have
jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
consideration does not exceed one crore rupees:
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may
prescribe such other value, as it deems fit.
(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a District Commission within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction,—
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than
one, at the time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on
business or has a branch office or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the
institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or
has a branch office, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case the
permission of the District Commission is given; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain.
Qualifications,
etc., of
President and
members of
District
Commission.
Salaries,
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
President and
members of
District
Commission.
Transitional
provision.
Vacancy in
office of
member of
District
Commission.
Officers and
other
employees of
District
Commission.
Jurisdiction of
District
Commission.
(3) The District Commission shall ordinarily function in the district headquarters and
may perform its functions at such other place in the district, as the State Government may, in
consultation with the State Commission, notify in the Official Gazette from time to time.
35. (1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided, may be filed with a District
Commission by—
(a) the consumer,—
(i) to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or such service is provided or agreed to be provided; or
(ii) who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service;
(b) any recognised consumer association, whether the consumer to whom such
goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is provided
or agreed to be provided, or who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods
or service, is a member of such association or not;
(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the
same interest, with the permission of the District Commission, on behalf of, or for the
benefit of, all consumers so interested; or
(d) the Central Government, the Central Authority or the State Government, as
the case may be:
Provided that the complaint under this sub-section may be filed electronically in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "recognised consumer
association" means any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the
time being in force.
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied with such fee
and payable in such manner, including electronic form, as may be prescribed.
36. (1) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be conducted by the
President of that Commission and atleast one member thereof, sitting together:
Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it
is completed, the President and the other member shall continue the proceeding from the
stage at which it was last heard by the previous member.
(2) On receipt of a complaint made under section 35, the District Commission may, by
order, admit the complaint for being proceeded with or reject the same:
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this section unless an opportunity
of being heard has been given to the complainant:
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided
within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was filed.
(3) Where the District Commission does not decide the issue of admissibility of the
complaint within the period so specified, it shall be deemed to have been admitted.
37. (1) At the first hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at any later stage, if
it appears to the District Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may be
acceptable to the parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties
to give in writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter V.
(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by mediation and give their consent in
writing, the District Commission shall, within five days of receipt of such consent, refer the
Manner in
which
complaint
shall be made.
Proceedings
before
District
Commission.
Reference to
mediation.
matter for mediation, and in such case, the provisions of Chapter V, relating to mediation,
shall apply.
38. (1) The District Commission shall, on admission of a complaint, or in respect of
cases referred for mediation on failure of settlement by mediation, proceed with such
complaint.
(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods, the District Commission shall,—
(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days from the date
of its admission to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give
his version of the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not
exceeding fifteen days as may be granted by it;
(b) if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause (a)
denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take
any action to represent his case within the time given by the District Commission,
proceed to settle the consumer dispute in the manner specified in clauses (c) to (g);
(c) if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined
without proper analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of the goods from the
complainant, seal it and authenticate it in the manner as may be prescribed and refer
the sample so sealed to the appropriate laboratory along with a direction that such
laboratory to make an analysis or test, whichever may be necessary, with a view to
finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the complaint or
from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Commission
within a period of forty-five days of the receipt of the reference or within such extended
period as may be granted by it;
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory
under clause (c), require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Commission
such fees as may be specified, for payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying
out the necessary analysis or test in relation to the goods in question;
(e) remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause (d) to the appropriate
laboratory to enable it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause (c) and on
receipt of the report from the appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a copy of the
report along with such remarks as it may feel appropriate to the opposite party;
(f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate
laboratory, or disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by
the appropriate laboratory, require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in
writing his objections with regard to the report made by the appropriate laboratory;
(g) give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as the opposite
party of being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the
appropriate laboratory and also as to the objection made in relation thereto under
clause (f) and issue an appropriate order under section 39.
(3) The District Commission shall, if the complaint admitted by it under sub-section (2)
of section 36 relates to goods in respect of which the procedure specified in sub-section (2)
cannot be followed, or if the complaint relates to any services,—
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his
version of the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding
fifteen days as may be granted by the District Commission;
(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him
under clause (a) denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or
omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within the time given by the
District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the consumer dispute—
Procedure on
admission of
complaint.
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and
the opposite party, if the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations
contained in the complaint, or
(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the
complainant, where the opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent
his case within the time given by the Commission;
(c) decide the complaint on merits if the complainant fails to appear on the date
of hearing.
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the District Commission may, by
order, require an electronic service provider to provide such information, documents or
records, as may be specified in that order.
(5) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in sub-sections (1) and
(2) shall be called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justice
have not been complied with.
(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District Commission on the basis of affidavit
and documentary evidence placed on record:
Provided that where an application is made for hearing or for examination of parties in
person or through video conferencing, the District Commission may, on sufficient cause
being shown, and after recording its reasons in writing, allow the same.
(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt
of notice by opposite party where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of
commodities and within five months if it requires analysis or testing of commodities:
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the District Commission
unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded
in writing by the Commission:
Provided further that the District Commission shall make such orders as to the costs
occasioned by the adjournment as may be specified by regulations:
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so
specified, the District Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time
of disposing of the said complaint.
(8) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Commission, if
it appears necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(9) For the purposes of this section, the District Commission shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a
suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness
and examining the witness on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material
object as evidence;
(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the
appropriate laboratory or from any other relevant source;
(e) issuing of commissions for the examination of any witness, or document;
and
5 of 1908.
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(10) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
District Commission shall be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of section 195
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(11) Where the complainant is a consumer referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of
section 2, the provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or decree
shall be construed as a reference to a complaint or the order of the District Commission
thereon.
(12) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party
against whom the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply subject to the modification that every
reference therein to the plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a
complainant or the opposite party, as the case may be.
39. (1) Where the District Commission is satisfied that the goods complained against
suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations
contained in the complaint about the services or any unfair trade practices, or claims for
compensation under product liability are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party
directing him to do one or more of the following, namely:—
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the
goods in question;
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be
free from any defect;
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid
by the complainant along with such interest on such price or charges as may be
decided;
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer
for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite
party:
Provided that the District Commission shall have the power to grant punitive
damages in such circumstances as it deems fit;
(e) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation in a product
liability action under Chapter VI;
(f) to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies in the services in question;
(g) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice and not to
repeat them;
(h) not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods for sale;
(i) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale;
(j) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services
which are hazardous in nature;
(k) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or
injury has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable
conveniently:
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than
twenty-five per cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or service provided, as
the case may be, to such consumers;
Findings of
District
Commission.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
(l) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of misleading
advertisement at the cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading
advertisement;
(m) to provide for adequate costs to parties; and
(n) to cease and desist from issuing any misleading advertisement.
(2) Any amount obtained under sub-section (1) shall be credited to such fund and
utilised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) In any proceeding conducted by the President and a member and if they differ on
any point or points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the
same to another member for hearing on such point or points and the opinion of the majority
shall be the order of the District Commission:
Provided that the other member shall give his opinion on such point or points referred
to him within a period of one month from the date of such reference.
(4) Every order made by the District Commission under sub-section (1) shall be signed
by the President and the member who conducted the proceeding:
Provided that where the order is made as per majority opinion under sub-section (3),
such order shall also be signed by the other member.
40. The District Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed
by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order.
41. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Commission may prefer an
appeal against such order to the State Commission on the grounds of facts or law within a
period of forty-five days from the date of the order, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the District Commission, shall be entertained by the State Commission
unless the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any order passed under sub-section (1) of
section 81 by the District Commission pursuant to a settlement by mediation under
section 80.
42. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the State Commission, in the State.
(2) The State Commission shall ordinarily function at the State capital and perform its
functions at such other places as the State Government may in consultation with the State
Commission notify in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, establish regional benches
of the State Commission, at such places, as it deems fit.
(3) Each State Commission shall consist of—
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than four or not more than such number of members as may be
prescribed in consultation with the Central Government.
Review by
District
Commission
in certain
cases.
Appeal
against order
of District
Commission.
Establishment
of State
Consumer
Disputes
Redressal
Commission.
43. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the
qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of
office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the State Commission.
44. The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the
State Commission.
45. Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of the State
Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such, as
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.
46. (1) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers
and other employees required to assist the State Commission in the discharge of its functions
and provide the Commission with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the State Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the President.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
47. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have
jurisdiction—
(a) to entertain—
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
consideration, exceeds rupees one crore, but does not exceed rupees ten crore:
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do,
it may prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or
services paid as consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the
State; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute
which is pending before or has been decided by any District Commission within the
State, where it appears to the State Commission that such District Commission has
exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so
vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more
members as the President may deem fit:
Provided that the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench.
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the President who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing
on such point or points by one or more of the other members and such point or points shall
Qualifications,
etc., of
President and
members of
State
Commission.
Salaries,
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
President and
members of
State
Commission.
Transitional
provision.
Officers and
employees of
State
Commission.
Jurisdiction of
State
Commission.
be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:
Provided that the President or the other members, as the case may be, shall give
opinion on the point or points so referred within a period of one month from the date of such
reference.
(4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose
jurisdiction,—
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than
one, at the time of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on
business or has a branch office or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the
institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or
has a branch office or personally works for gain, provided in such case, the permission
of the State Commission is given; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain.
48. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State Commission
may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before a District
Commission to another District Commission within the State if the interest of justice so
requires.
49. (1) The provisions relating to complaints under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall,
with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the disposal of complaints by
the State Commission.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1),  the State Commission may
also declare any terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer, to be null and void.
50. The State Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed by
it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order.
51. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of
its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47
may prefer an appeal against such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty
days from the date of the order in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the National Commission shall not entertain the appeal after the expiry
of the said period of thirty days unless it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission
unless the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act or by any other law for the
time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the National Commission from any order passed in
appeal by any State Commission, if the National Commission is satisfied that the case
involves a substantial question of law.
(3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely
state the substantial question of law involved in the appeal.
(4) Where the National Commission is satisfied that a substantial question of law is
involved in any case, it shall formulate that question and hear the appeal on that question:
Transfer of
cases.
Procedure
applicable to
State
Commission.
Review by
State
Commission in
certain cases.
Appeal to
National
Commission.
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the
power of the National Commission to hear, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the appeal
on any other substantial question of law, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question
of law.
(5) An appeal may lie to the National Commission under this section from an order
passed ex parte by the State Commission.
52. An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made
to dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission:
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficient cause is shown and the
reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission:
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case
may be, shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment, as may be
specified by regulations:
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so
specified, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall
record in writing the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said appeal.
53. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the National Commission.
(2) The National Commission shall ordinarily function at the National Capital Region
and perform its functions at such other places as the Central Government may in consultation
with the National Commission notify in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, establish regional Benches
of the National Commission, at such places, as it deems fit.
54. The National Commission shall consist of—
(a) a President; and
(b) not less than four and not more than such number of members as may be
prescribed.
55. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for
qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal
and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the National
Commission:
Provided that the President and members of the National Commission shall hold office
for such term as specified in the rules made by the Central Government but not exceeding
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided further that no President or members shall hold office as such after he has
attained such age as specified in the rules made by the Central Government which shall not
exceed,—
(a) in the case of the President, the age of seventy years;
(b) in the case of any other member, the age of sixty-seven years.
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of
President and members of the National Commission shall be varied to his disadvantage after
his appointment.
Hearing of
appeal.
Establishment
of National
Consumer
Disputes
Redressal
Commission.
Composition
of National
Commission.
Qualifications,
etc., of
President and
members of
National
Commission.
56. The President and every other member appointed immediately before the
commencement of section 177 of the Finance Act, 2017 shall continue to be governed by the
provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and the rules made thereunder as if this Act
had not come into force.
57. (1) The Central Government shall provide, in consultation with the President of the
National Commission, such number of officers and other employees to assist the National
Commission in the discharge of its functions as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the National Commission shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the President of the National Commission.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the National Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
58. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have
jurisdiction—
(a) to entertain—
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
consideration exceeds rupees ten crore:
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do,
it may prescribe such other value, as it deems fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or
services paid as consideration exceeds ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission;
(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority;  and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute
which is pending before or has been decided by any State Commission where it
appears to the National Commission that such State Commission has exercised a
jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more
members as he may deem fit:
Provided that the senior-most member of the Bench shall preside over the Bench.
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the President who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing
on such point or points by one or more of the other members and such point or points shall
be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it:
Provided that the President or the other member, as the case may be, shall give opinion
on the point or points so referred within a period of two months from the date of such
reference.
59. (1) The provisions relating to complaints under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall,
with such modifications as may be considered necessary, be applicable to the disposal of
complaints by the National Commission.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the National Commission may also declare
any terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer to be null and void.
Transitional
provision.
Other officers
and
employees of
National
Commission.
Jurisdiction of
National
Commission.
Procedure
applicable to
National
Commission.
7 of 2017.
68 of 1986.
60. The National Commission shall have the power to review any of the order passed
by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own motion or on an
application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order.
61. Where an order is passed by the National Commission ex parte, the aggrieved
party may make an application to the Commission for setting aside such order.
62. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National Commission
may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending
before the District Commission of one State to a District Commission of another State or
before one State Commission to another State Commission.
63. When the office of President of the National Commission is vacant or a person
occupying such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of
his office, these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the National Commission:
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court or a person who has been a
Judicial Member is a member of the National Commission, such member or where the number
of such members is more than one, the senior-most person amongst such members, shall
preside over the National Commission in the absence of President of that Commission.
64. No act or proceeding of the District Commission, the State Commission or the
National Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst
its members or any defect in the constitution thereof.
65. (1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served by delivering or
transmitting a copy thereof by registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite
party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such
courier service, approved by the District Commission, the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, or by any other mode of transmission of documents
including electronic means.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the notice required
by this Act may be served on an electronic service provider at the address provided by it on
the electronic platform from where it provides its services as such and for this purpose, the
electronic service provider shall designate a nodal officer to accept and process such notices.
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the
opposite party or his agent or, as the case may be, by the complainant is received by the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
or postal article containing the notice is received back by such District Commission, State
Commission or the National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have been
made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the courier service to the effect
that the opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take delivery of the postal
article containing the notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means specified
in sub-section (1) when tendered or transmitted to him, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall declare that the notice
has been duly served on the opposite party or to the complainant, as the case may be:
Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by
registered post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section shall be
made notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or for
any other reason, has not been received by the District Commission, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may be, within thirty days from the date of issue of
notice.
Review by
National
Commission in
certain cases.
Power to set
aside ex parte
orders.
Transfer of
cases.
Vacancy in
office of
President of
National
Commission.
Vacancies or
defects in
appointment
not to
invalidate
orders.
Service of
notice, etc.
(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant, as the
case may be, shall be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the
opposite party, to the place where business or profession is carried on, and in case of the
complainant, the place where such person actually and voluntarily resides.
66. Where the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on
an application by a complainant or otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the larger
interest of consumers, it may direct any individual or organisation or expert to assist the
National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be.
67. Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in exercise
of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58,
may prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty days
from the date of the order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period:
Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court
unless that person has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be
prescribed.
68. Every order of a District Commission or the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order
under the provisions of this Act, be final.
69. (1) The District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission
shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the
cause of action has arisen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be
entertained after the period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
that he had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within such period:
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the District Commission
or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, records its reasons
for condoning such delay.
70. (1) The National Commission shall have the authority to lay down such adequate
standards in consultation with the Central Government from time to time, for better protection
of the interests of consumers and for that purpose, shall have administrative control over all
the State Commissions in the following matters, namely:—
(a) monitoring performance of the State Commissions in terms of their disposal
by calling for periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and pendency of
cases;
(b) investigating into any allegations against the President and members of a
State Commission and submitting inquiry report to the State Government concerned
along with copy endorsed to the Central Government for necessary action;
(c) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the
hearing of matters, prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the
opposite parties, furnishing of  english translation of judgments written in any language,
speedy grant of copies of documents;
Experts to
assist
National
Commission
or State
Commission.
Appeal against
order of
National
Commission.
Finality of
orders.
Limitation
period.
Administrative
control.
(d) overseeing the functioning of the State Commission or the District
Commission either by way of inspection or by any other means, as the National
Commission may like to order from time to time, to ensure that the objects and purposes
of the Act are best served and the standards set by the National Commission are
implemented without interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom.
(2) There shall be a monitoring cell to be constituted by the President of the National
Commission to oversee the functioning of the State Commissions from the administrative
point of view.
(3) The State Commission shall have administrative control over all the District
Commissions within its jurisdiction in all matters referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) The National Commission and the State Commissions shall furnish to the Central
Government periodically or as and when required, any information including the pendency
of cases in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The State Commission shall furnish, periodically or as and when required to the
State Government any information including pendency of cases in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.
71. Every order made by a District Commission, State Commission or the National
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a Court
in a suit before it and the provisions of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the modification that every
reference therein to the decree shall be construed as reference to the order made under this
Act.
72. (1) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the District Commission or the
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month, but which may extend to
three years, or with fine, which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, but
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be,
shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the trial of offences under
sub-section (1), and on conferment of such powers, the District Commission or the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a Judicial
Magistrate of first class for the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) Save as otherwise provided, the offences under sub-section (1) shall be tried
summarily by the District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be.
73. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
where an order is passed under sub-section (1) of section 72, an appeal shall lie, both on
facts and on law from—
(a) the order made by the District Commission to the State Commission;
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and
(c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court.
 (2) Except as provided in sub-section (1), no appeal shall lie before any court, from
any order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days
from the date of order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be:
Enforcement
of orders of
District
Commission,
State
Commission
and National
Commission.
Penalty for
non-
compliance of
order.
Appeal against
order passed
under section 72.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court,
as the case may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days,
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the
said period of thirty days.