CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
88. Whoever, fails to comply with any direction of the Central Authority under
sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with both.
89. Any manufacturer or service provider who causes a false or misleading
advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend
to ten lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
90. (1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for
sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any product containing an adulterant shall be
punished, if such act—
(a) does not result in any injury to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(b) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend
to three lakh rupees;
(c) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees; and
(d) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with
fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
(2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of
first conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section,
under any law for the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second
or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "adulterant" means any material including extraneous matter which is
employed or used for making a product unsafe;
(b) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 320
of the Indian Penal Code.
91. (1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for
sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any spurious goods shall be punished, if such
act—
(a) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend
to three lakh rupees;
Penalty for
non-
compliance of
direction of
Central
Authority.
Punishment
for false or
misleading
advertisement.
Punishment
for
manufacturing
for sale or
storing, selling
or distributing
or importing
products
containing
adulterant.
Punishment
for
manufacturing
for sale or for
storing or
selling or
distributing or
importing
spurious goods.
45 of 1860.
(b) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees;
(c) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
(2) The offences under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of
first conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section,
under any law for the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second
or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence.
92. No cognizance shall be taken by a competent court of any offence under sections 88
and 89 except on a complaint filed by the Central Authority or any officer authorised by it in
this behalf.
93. The Director General or any other officer, exercising powers under section 22, who
knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so doing, and yet—
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any premises; or
(b) seizes any record, register or other document or article,
shall, for every such offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.