CHAPTER II
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish with effect from such
date as it may specify in that notification, the Central Consumer Protection Council to be
known as the Central Council.
(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the Central
Government, who shall be the Chairperson; and
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Council shall meet as and when necessary, but at least one meeting
of the Council shall be held every year.
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think
fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be
prescribed.
5. The objects of the Central Council shall be to render advice on promotion and
protection of the consumers' rights under this Act.
Central
Consumer
Protection
Council.
Procedure for
meetings of
Central
Council.
Objects of
Central
Council.
6. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification, establish with effect from such
date as it may specify in such notification, a State Consumer Protection Council for such
State to be known as the State Council.
(2) The State Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Minister-in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the State Government who
shall be the Chairperson;
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed;
(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding ten, as
may be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings
shall be held every year.
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think
fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, as may be
prescribed.
7. The objects of every State Council shall be to render advice on promotion and
protection of consumer rights under this Act within the State.
8. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish for every District with
effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a District Consumer Protection
Council to be known as the District Council.
(2) The District Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be the
Chairperson; and
(b) such number of other official and non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed.
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two
meetings shall be held every year.
(4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as the
Chairperson may think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of
its business as may be prescribed.
9. The objects of every District Council shall be to render advice on promotion and
protection of consumer rights under this Act within the district.