CHAPTER V
MEDIATION
74. (1) The State Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation
cell to be attached to each of the District Commissions and the State Commissions of that
State.
(2) The Central Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation cell
to be attached to the National Commission and each of the regional Benches.
(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such persons as may be prescribed.
(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain—
(a) a list of empanelled mediators;
(b) a list of cases handled by the cell;
(c) record of proceeding; and
(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations.
(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District
Commission, State Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, in the
manner specified by regulations.
75. (1) For the purpose of mediation, the National Commission or the State Commission
or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of the mediators to be
maintained by the consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the recommendation of a
selection committee consisting of the President and a member of that Commission.
(2) The qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the
procedure for empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators
shall be removed or empanelment shall be cancelled and other matters relating thereto, shall
be such as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of
five years, and the empanelled mediators shall be eligible to be considered for re-empanelment
for another term, subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations.
76. The District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission shall,
while nominating any person from the panel of mediators referred to in section 75, consider
his suitability for resolving the consumer dispute involved.
77. It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose—
(a) any personal, professional or financial interest in the outcome of the consumer
dispute;
(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a justifiable doubt as to his
independence or impartiality;  and
(c) such other facts as may be specified by regulations.
78. Where the District Commission or the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied, on the information furnished by the mediator or
on the information received from any other person including parties to the complaint and
after hearing the mediator, it shall replace such mediator by another mediator.
Establishment
of consumer
mediation
cell.
Empanelment
of mediators.
Nomination of
mediators
from panel.
Duty of
mediator to
disclose
certain facts.
Replacement
of mediator
in certain
cases.
79. (1) The mediation shall be held in the consumer mediation cell attached to the
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be.
(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for mediation by the District Commission or
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the mediator nominated
by such Commission shall have regard to the rights and obligations of the parties, the
usages of trade, if any, the circumstances giving rise to the consumer dispute and such other
relevant factors, as he may deem necessary and shall be guided by the principles of natural
justice while carrying out mediation.
(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct mediation within such time and in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
80. (1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached between the parties with
respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some of
the issues, the terms of such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed
by the parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives.
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the
signed agreement along with such report to the concerned Commission.
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the
mediator is of the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report
accordingly and submit the same to the concerned Commission.
81. (1) The District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of the settlement report, pass
suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of the matter
accordingly.
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of
the issues which have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such
consumer dispute.
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District
Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall
continue to hear all the issues involved in such consumer dispute.