CHAPTER VI
PRODUCT LIABILITY
82. This Chapter shall apply to every claim for compensation under a product liability
action by a complainant for any harm caused by a defective product manufactured by a
product manufacturer or serviced by a product service provider or sold by a product seller.
83. A product liability action may be brought by a complainant against a product
manufacturer or a product service provider or a product seller, as the case may be, for any
harm caused to him on account of a defective product.
84. (1) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action, if—
(a) the product contains a manufacturing defect; or
(b) the product is defective in design; or
(c) there is a deviation from manufacturing specifications; or
(d) the product does not conform to the express warranty; or
(e) the product fails to contain adequate instructions of correct usage to prevent
any harm or any warning regarding improper or incorrect usage.
Procedure for
mediation.
Settlement
through
mediation.
Recording
settlement and
passing of
order.
Application of
Chapter.
Product
liability
action.
Liability of
product
manufacturer.
(2) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action even if he proves
that he was not negligent or fraudulent in making the express warranty of a product.
85. A product service provider shall be liable in a product liability action, if—
(a) the service provided by him was faulty or imperfect or deficient or inadequate
in quality, nature or manner of performance which is required to be provided by or
under any law for the time being in force, or pursuant to any contract or otherwise; or
(b) there was an act of omission or commission or negligence or conscious
withholding any information which caused harm; or
(c) the service provider did not issue adequate instructions or warnings to
prevent any harm; or
(d) the service did not conform to express warranty or the terms and conditions
of the contract.
86. A product seller who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable in a product
liability action, if—
(a) he has exercised substantial control over the designing, testing,
manufacturing, packaging or labelling of a product that caused harm; or
(b) he has altered or modified the product and such alteration or modification
was the substantial factor in causing the harm; or
(c) he has made an express warranty of a product independent of any express
warranty made by a manufacturer and such product failed to conform to the express
warranty made by the product seller which caused the harm; or
(d) the product has been sold by him and the identity of product manufacturer
of such product is not known, or if known, the service of notice or process or warrant
cannot be effected on him or he is not subject to the law which is in force in India or the
order, if any, passed or to be passed cannot be enforced against him; or
(e) he failed to exercise reasonable care in assembling, inspecting or maintaining
such product or he did not pass on the warnings or instructions of the product
manufacturer regarding the dangers involved or proper usage of the product while
selling such product and such failure was the proximate cause of the harm.
87. (1) A product liability action cannot be brought against the product seller if, at the
time of harm, the product was misused, altered, or modified.
(2) In any product liability action based on the failure to provide adequate warnings or
instructions, the product manufacturer shall not be liable, if—
(a) the product was purchased by an employer for use at the workplace and the
product manufacturer had provided warnings or instructions to such employer;
(b) the product was sold as a component or material to be used in another
product and necessary warnings or instructions were given by the product manufacturer
to the purchaser of such component or material, but the harm was caused to the
complainant by use of the end product in which such component or material was
used;
(c) the product was one which was legally meant to be used or dispensed only
by or under the supervision of an expert or a class of experts and the product
manufacturer had employed reasonable means to give the warnings or instructions for
usage of such product to such expert or class of experts; or
(d) the complainant, while using such product, was under the influence of alcohol
or any prescription drug which had not been prescribed by a medical practitioner.
Liability of
product
service
provider.
Liability of
product sellers.
Exceptions to
product
liability
action.
(3) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for failure to instruct or warn about a
danger which is obvious or commonly known to the user or consumer of such product or
which, such user or consumer, ought to have known, taking into account the characteristics
of such product.